# Multi-tenancy


<div class="result docutils container">
<div class="warning admonition">
<p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>
    <p>Multi-tenancy is early in development and should not be used in production.
    We create a multi-user Flux install, a set of users, and then authenticate
    to submit jobs via OAuth2 with encoded payloads, meaning that we store hashed
    passwords in the temporary database and the Flux Operator generates a shared
    secret for the Flux Restful API and itself. The multi-tenant case is really
    only relevant for a persistent minicluster or one that uses submit because
    otherwise we are just submitting jobs directly as one flux user.</p>
</div>
</div>

"Multi-tenancy" means having multiple tenants, or users, in a cluster! We can accomplish this
fairly by creating multiple users for our MiniCluster. This small tutorial will walk through
creating an example with MiniKube.

## 1. Create Cluster

Bring up your MiniKube cluster.

```bash
$ minikube start
```

Then choose your step of choice to [install the operator](https://flux-framework.org/flux-operator/getting_started/user-guide.html#install)

## 2. Custom Resource Definition

You'll want a custom resource definition that turns on multi-user mode, and defines the users you
want to create, in addition to root (sets up the pods) and flux (owns the main flux instance). We
have a minicluster.yaml provided as an example:

```yaml
apiVersion: flux-framework.org/v1alpha1
kind: MiniCluster
metadata:
  name: flux-sample
  namespace: flux-operator
spec:
  # suppress all output except for test run
  logging:
    quiet: false

  # Number of pods to create for MiniCluster
  size: 4

  # Define one or more users for your cluster
  # These users will be created, and user/pass required for auth
  # passwords are optional, if not provided will be generated
  users:
    - name: peenut
    - name: squidward
    - name: avocadosaurus

  containers:
    - image: ghcr.io/flux-framework/flux-restful-api:latest
    # Multi-user mode should not have a command
```

Note that we don't provide a command to run the Flux Restful API. It's recommended to pull the container
to MiniKube first:

```bash
$ minikube ssh docker pull ghcr.io/flux-framework/flux-restful-api:latest
```

Then, create the flux-operator namespace and MiniCluster:

```bash
$ kubectl create namespace flux-operator
$ kubectl create -f examples/flux-restful/minicluster-multi-tenant.yaml
```

## 3. View Logs

And then in the logs, we can see the different blocks of creating users (and passwords):

```bash
# get pods
$ kubectl get -n flux-operator pods

# get logs for broker pod
$ kubectl logs -n flux-operator flux-sample-0-fz64b
```

```console
INFO:flux-restful:Initial data created
Adding 'peenut' with password '0ff24df5'
.
INFO:flux-restful:User peenut has been created.
Adding 'squidward' with password '393418c3'
.
INFO:flux-restful:User squidward has been created.
Adding 'avocadosaurus' with password '4ae21fc5'
...
```

And the Flux Restful Server is ready to go! Note that a secret is generated by the
server that would be required for you to use the RESTful API (to encode payloads).
If you want to define your own secret, add it to the fluxRestful directive in
the MiniCluster yaml file, e.g.,

```yaml
fluxRestful:
  secretKey: thisisnotsosecretakey
```

For the web interface, you can use basic auth, and since we aren't issuing tokens,
there is no need for the secret key.

```console
broker.info[0]: quorum-full: quorum->run 0.461457s
🍓 Require auth: True
🍓   Secret key ************************************
🍓    Flux user: ****
🍓   Flux token: ************************************
INFO:     Started server process [217]
INFO:     Waiting for application startup.
INFO:     Application startup complete.
INFO:     Uvicorn running on http://0.0.0.0:5000 (Press CTRL+C to quit)
```

Make sure that you grab a user name and password from the terminal.

## 4. Expose Web Interface

Next we will want to expose the service.

```bash
$ kubectl port-forward -n flux-operator flux-sample-0-zdhkp 5000:5000
```

And open your browser to [http://localhost:5000](http://localhost:5000). You
should be able to login with a user and password, which are required when you want to
submit or see the jobs table. In more specific terms, when you click on the top left 
hamburger to "submit" you'll be prompted for a user name and password (as shown in the logs above). 
You can also get prompted in the "API" link in the top right (and test the other endpoints).

If you want more programmattic access, look at 
our Python SDK examples for "port forwarding" that will do the same above, 
but not require the manual extra work (all is done in Python).

## 5. Admin Actions

### Adding a User

It is possible to dynamically add a user! You will need to create them inside the container.
Shell inside to interact directly:

```bash
$ kubectl exec -it -n flux-operator flux-sample-0-bnwnt -- bash
```

The flux-restful-api is under `/flux-restful-api`

Add a new user:

```bash
$ python3 /flux-restful-api/app/db/init_db.py add-user newuser newuser
```
```console
INFO:flux-restful:User newuser has been created.
```

### Viewing Instance Jobs

If you shell into the broker pod (as shown above) you can connect to the broker's socket, the `FLUX_URI` 
as follows:

```bash
$ export FLUX_URI=local:///run/flux/local
$ sudo -u flux flux proxy $FLUX_URI
```
```bash
$ flux jobs -a
```
```console
       JOBID USER     NAME       ST NTASKS NNODES     TIME INFO
   ƒ7EaBwt4w flux     hostname   CD      1      1   0.019s flux-sample-3
   ƒ6X8ua7Fu flux     pwd        CD      1      1   0.042s flux-sample-3
   ƒ6MNGWc9m flux     hostname   CD      1      1   0.047s flux-sample-3
   ƒ5u2QLkgP flux     hostname   CD      1      1   0.075s flux-sample-1
```
You'll be the flux user that owns the instance:

```bash
$ whoami
flux
```

We are currently testing different ways to (aside from the id) ensure ownership
of a job. This is why multi-user mode is "use at your own risk" for the time being -
both jobs and the working space is largely shared.

## Frequently Asked Questions

### What are the different types of multi-tenant use cases?

#### 1. A single multi-tenant MiniCluster

In the example above, we define our users in advance and bring up a single MiniCluster, meaning one MiniCluster
custom resource definition on one Kubernetes cluster, that allows multiple users to submit jobs authenticating
with basic (UI) or OAauth-based authentication (RESTFul) to authenticate to the Flux RESTFul API database. 
This is done via the [flux-restful-api](https://github.com/flux-framework/flux-restful-api), which also has
a command line client to submit jobs from the command line, where you export your credentials and secret in
the environment instead. The server secret is used to encode the payloads. 

This use case is recommended if you have a small group that would be able to submit jobs to the same 
Flux Instance on a set of container bases with the same needs, and where you largely trust one another. We do not
yet support multi-tenant storage (we are still working on simple storage) so the filesystem is largely shared,
but still has expected user permissions (e.g., "peenut" has a home). The cluster is persistent,
meaning it stays up until the Kubernetes cluster owner destroys it.

#### 2. Multiple MiniClusters for multi-tenancy

For this use case, you create a single-user MiniCluster, meaning it's owned by only one user, and that user has total
control of the Flux Instance, to submit their jobs to. Akin to the previous example, it is persistent and
can be brought down when the user is finished. Unlike the first, if you have several (separate) MiniClusters
running on a Kubernetes cluster, the Flux instances do not communicate. This use case is ideal for users
that currently need storage or need a custom base container for the MiniCluster.

### What are the non multi-tenant use cases?

Bringing up an ephermal MiniCluster to run one job is not considered a multi-user use case,
and we don't even care about creating user accounts. The MiniCluster comes up, runs the job,
and the job completes and everything cleans up.

If you have any questions please [let us know](https://github.com/flux-framework/flux-operator/issues)!
